---
layout: post
title: Shuffle
description: 
modified: 2014-01-08
tags: [algorithms]
image:
  feature: abstract-4.jpg
comments: true
share: true
---

## The Problem
Recreate the functionality of the [Underscore.js](http://underscorejs.org/) _.shuffle function.

## Understanding the Problem
[Shuffling algorithms](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shuffling#Shuffling%5Falgorithms) can be considered the opposite of sorting algorithms.  The goal of the shuffle function is to randomize the content of an array (for this exercise, I limited my versions of the shuffle function to accept only arrays) so that there is no particular order based on any criteria whatsoever.  

## Various Versions

### Fisher-Yates Shuffle
A simple Google search showed me that the most popular shuffling algorithm is [Fisher-Yates Shuffle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher-Yates_shuffle).  This algorithm starts by looking at the whole range of indices in the array and then swapping the value in the last index with the value in a random index within the range of indices.  On the next iteration, the range of indices shrinks by 1 since the last element in the array has already been placed with the shuffle.  The array is effectively being divided into an already-shuffled section and a to-be-shuffled one.  This continues until the whole array has been shuffled.  And since every permutation is equally likely, this algorithm is unbiased.  

Here's a table view of what is happening for the array [0,1,2,3].


|  Range -|- Random Index -|- Unshuffled Section -|- Shuffled Section |  
|:--------|:--------------:|:--------------------:|------------------:|
|         |                |         0 1 2 3      |                   |
|   0-3   |       2        |         0 1 3        | 2                 |
|   0-2   |       3        |         0 1          | 3 2               |
|   0-1   |       0        |         1            | 0 3 2             |
|    0    |       1        |                      | 1 0 3 2           |
{: rules="groups"}

Below is my implementation of _.shuffle.

{% highlight javascript %}
_.shuffle = function(array) {
  var newArr = array.slice();
  for (var i=array.length-1; i>0; i--) {
    var rand = Math.round(Math.random() * i);
    var temp = newArr[rand];
    newArr[rand] = newArr[i];
    newArr[i] = temp;
  }
  return newArr;
};
{% endhighlight %}

### Using Sort
There is also a clever way to make _.shuffle using a customized sort() method. 

{% highlight javascript %}
_.shuffle = function(array) {
  return array.slice().sort(function() { return Math.random() - 0.5; });
};
{% endhighlight %}

However, this isn't necessarily completely random.  The elements will be biased towards their original positions in the array.

For more information about these two methods of shuffling, check out [this Stack Overflow post](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/962802/is-it-correct-to-use-javascript-array-sort-method-for-shuffling).  I especially appreciated Christoph's discussion and his implementation.

### Christoph's implementation on Stack Overflow

{% highlight javascript %}
function shuffle(array) {
  var tmp, current, top = array.length;
  if(top) while(--top) {
    current = Math.floor(Math.random() * (top + 1));
    tmp = array[current];
    array[current] = array[top];
    array[top] = tmp;
  }
  return array;
}{% endhighlight %}

### The [Underscore.js Source](http://underscorejs.org/docs/underscore.html) 
The original underscore shuffle function takes any sort of collection, not just arrays.  

{% highlight javascript %}
_.shuffle = function(obj) {
  var rand;
  var index = 0;
  var shuffled = [];
  each(obj, function(value) {
    rand = _.random(index++);
    shuffled[index - 1] = shuffled[rand];
    shuffled[rand] = value;
  });
  return shuffled;
};
{% endhighlight %}

And here's a mixin to extend Underscore's shuffle to use Fisher-Yates that I found [here](https://github.com/ryantenney/underscore/commit/4890699d922cc9924ea28dd9ed21c1fefe33e4de#commitcomment-528646).

{% highlight javascript %}
_.mixin({
  shuffle : function(obj) {
    var shuffled = [], rand;
    _.each(obj, function(value, index, list) {
      if (index == 0) {
        shuffled[0] = value;
      } else {
        rand = Math.floor(Math.random() * (index + 1));
        shuffled[index] = shuffled[rand];
        shuffled[rand] = value;
      }
    });
    return shuffled;
  }
});{% endhighlight %}




